Determination of effect of cation concentration on electromotive force Group 2 Chakshu Turki (s2498618), Jip Hoogland (s2586770), Julian Westerveld (s2580039). - Introduction An electrochemical cell is a device which transports electrons from the anode side to the cathode side. On the anode side there is a zinc strip in Zinc sulphate (ZnSO4), on the cathode side there is a copper strip in Copper sulphate (CuSO4). On both the cathode and anode side half reactions take place, on the anodic side electrons are released and on the cathodic side electrons are received. In this experiment the half reactions were as follows: Zn(s) -> Zn2+ + 2e- Cu2+ + 2e- -> Cu(s) The total reaction is then: Zn(s) + Cu2+ -> Zn2+ + Cu(s) This will result in an increasing positive charge on the anode side and an increase in negative charge on the cathode side. To compensate for this, a salt bridge is added which releases anions to the anode side and cations to the cathode side. In this experiment the influence of the concentration of the cathode side (concentration CuSO4) is determined. The concentration and measured voltage are logarithmically dependent of each other and this can be reasoned using the Nernst equation: U = Ucell - RT/nF*ln([cathode]/[anode]) Using this equation, the trend line can be estimated. Figure 1: Set-up of the experiment - Conceptual model In figure 1 the experimental set up for this experiment can be seen. The set up represents an electrochemical cell that is going to be used to determine the effect of cationic concentration on electromotive force. In this experimental set up the following half reactions take place, Zn(s) -> Zn2+ + 2e- and Cu2+ + 2e- -> Cu(s), which results in the total reaction Zn(s) + Cu2+ -> Zn2+ + Cu(s). The higher the concentration Cu2+ ions, the more half reactions will take place, which will result in a larger amount of transported electrons that will result in a higher measured cell potential. This can also be explained by looking at the Nernst equation. The cell potential can be calculated with the Nernst equation: Utotal = Ucell – RT/nF*ln([reductor]/[oxidator]). With higher concentration of oxidator (Cu2+), the value of ln in the equation becomes smaller as reduction is at the copper side thus the value of Utotal rises exponentially. - Results Cell Notation Measured potential (V) (Chakshu) Measured potential (V) (Jip) Measured potential (V)(Julian) Average measured potential (V) Zn ׀ Zn2+(0.10 M) ׀ Cu2+(0.1M) (reference electrode) 1.0455 0.9723 1.04 1.019 Zn ׀ Zn2+(0.10 M) ׀ Cu2+(saturated) (reference electrode) 1.1138 0.9846 0.97 1.023 Zn ׀ Zn2+(0.10 M) ׀ Cu2+(1×10-3M) ׀ Cu 0.9828 0.9603 0.95 0.964 Zn ׀ Zn2+(0.10 M) ׀ Cu2+(0.030 M) ׀ Cu 1.0262 0.9701 0.92 0.972 Zn ׀ Zn2+(0.10 M) ׀ Cu2+(0.30 M) ׀ Cu 1.0805 0.9434* 0.97 0.998 Zn ׀ Zn2+(0.10 M) ׀ Cu2+(Unknown Sol) ׀ Cu 1.0633 0.9885 0.94 0.997 Table 1: All of the results from the experiment and its average Graph 1: Potential vs concentration graph based on the average Graph 2: Potential vs concentration graph based on Julian's data Graph 3: Potential vs concentration graph based on Jip's data Graph 4: Potential vs concentration graph based on Chakshu's data 0.3M was excluded from Jip's data. 0.03M was excluded from Julian's data. *Even though there were only 4 measurements, by removing one of the four results, the coefficient of determination could strongly increase. The results presented in the table show a clear relationship between each other. The higher the concentration of copper ions, the higher the measured cell potential. Therefore it is also logical that the solution saturated with copper ions shows the highest cell potential. The relation between the concentration of copper ions and the measured potential is logarithmic (as can be seen in the graphs), this relation can also be found in the Nernst equation, in which the concentration is logarithmic (U = Ucell - RT/nF*ln([reductor]/[oxidator])). Each of the graphs has a coefficient of determination (R^2), this coefficient gives the accuracy of the measurements, which 1 as the highest accuracy and 0 as the lowest accuracy. The graphs 3 and 4 give a near 1 (with an inaccurate measurement left out) and therefore the results are likely to be correct. However, Julian's data has a low coefficient of determination of 0.277 (graph 2), therefore it can be concluded that possibly something during the measurements went wrong which negatively affected the results. The average results in this case do not give a more accurate overall result, this is shown by the low coefficient of determination (of 0.581). This is partly due to the inaccurate results of Julian (which are also included in the average) and most importantly, by taking the average the logarithmic relation between the results have been disorientated. - Discussion Results Discussion The concentration has been plotted against the measured cell potential There appears to be a logarithmic relationship between the measurements. The coefficients of determination are given. The near 1 coefficient of determination (of the results from Jip and Chakshu) indicate that the results are accurate. Table 2: Results and discussion Overall the practical went well. It was not hard to understand and the idea was clear. However, the leaking of the salt bridge did result in errors in the measured results. The salt bridge kept leaking salt (more than was needed), this resulted in diluting the solutions concentrated with ions and therefore indirectly resulted in a lower measured cell potential (for further details on the salt bridge, see the 'recommendations' section). - Conclusion The results show a logarithmic relation between the concentration and the measured cell potential, which can be seen in the graphs. The higher the concentration of reacting ions (here the Cu2+ ions), the higher the measured cell potential. This can be related back to the Nernst equation U = Ucell - RT/nF*ln([reductor]/[oxidator]) where it is shown that a higher concentration of anode results in a lower logarithmic value, which eventually results in a higher total cell potential. The Nernst equation also confirms the logarithmic relationship between the concentration and the measured cell potential. - Recommendations The idea of the practical was clear and it did not seem like a hard practical. However, due to the available material it became a difficult practical and above all an extremely frustrating practical. The main frustration was the salt bridge, the salt bridge was hard to hold steady in a holder and the main problem was that the salt bridge kept leaking salt at a rapid rate. The leaking caused the measurements errors (due to the change in concentration of the solution) and since we only had a limited amount of zinc available the possibility of multiple measurements was also no good solution. Not only did the leaking cause inaccuracies, it also needed all the attention during the practical. Since the salt bridge had to be filled at all times, which was not an easy task when you wanted to turn your attention to the other aspects of the practical. As a solution to this problem another (better) salt bridge or membrane could be used for the practical, and if this is not possible more zinc solution being available would help (to do more measurements with a fresh solution, that is not diluted by the salt yet). Overall the practical was clear and not hard to understand. - References No references were used.