


Lab journal exp 2: Determining the cell potential dependence on the concentration of the reacting ions.

Julian Westerveld – s2580039

Aim of the practicum and learning objective

Aim and learning objective from the practicum
Expected learning objective from the student before the experiment
Expected learning objective from the student after the experiment
Learning objective fulfilled?

Learn more about different electrochemical phenomenom (in the case the electrochemical cell) and further develop making conceptual models.

I expect to learn more about electrochemical cells and develop making conceptual models (and the lab journal in general).

Buiding and learning more about electrochemical cells and further develop making conceptual models.

Yes, I feel like I learned more about electrochemical cells and that my conceptual models are slowly improving.

Short introduction

An electrochemical cell is a cell that can transport electrons from the anode to the cathode and therefore create a current and also store energy (as in a battery). An electrochemical cell contains multiple components: An anode + cathode, a salt bridge or membrane, a wire connecting the anode with the cathode and (often) two ionic solutions in which the anode and cathode are placed. The cathode undergoes a reduction reaction (Accepts electrons) and the anode undergoes an oxidation reaction (gives away electrons), the electrons that are given away and accepted on the other part are transported through the wire, creating a current. The electron transport happens without applying energy when the electron potential of the reaction is positive. 

The two half reactions in this case are:
- Cu2+ + 2e- -> Cu (+0,34 V)
- Zn2+ + 2e- -> Zn (-0,76 V)
Combining the half reactions give:
Cu2+ + Zn Zn2+ + Cu

Risk assessment of the chemicals used in the lab

The used chemicals in this experiment are as follows: Zinc-sulphate and Copper-sulphate solutions, A Copper and Zinc strip and a salt bridge.

Zinc sulphate
Hazards: Corrosive, Irritant, Environmentally damaging
What to do in case of:
Contact with eyes: rinse cautiously for several minutes
Contact with skin: rinse with water for several minutes
Spills: Wipe up with paper and dispose in black bin
Chemical waste category: 1 
Wear gloves when handling this chemical


Copper sulphate
Hazards: Harmful, Irritant, Environmentally damaging
What to do in case of:
Contact with eyes: Rinse cautiously for several minutes
Contact with skin: Wash with plenty of water
Spills: Wipe up with paper and dispose in black bin
Chemical waste category: 1


Copper strip + Zinc strip
Hazards: none
What to do in case of:
Contact with eyes: (if contaminated) rinse eyes thoroughly 
Contact with skin: (if contaminated) wash with soap for 10-15 minutes
The strips may be re-used, so they can be cleaned with soap and used again.
The copper strip might be contaminated with copper-sulphate when getting the strip out of it, be thorough in cleaning this strip directly afterwards to prevent contamination of the workspace.


Salt bridge
Hazards: none
What to do in case of:
Contact with eyes: rinse the eyes with water gently for 10-15 minutes
Contact with skin: wash the area with soap for 10-15 minutes
Spills/breakage: Clean with tissue paper if the salt bridge breaks and the liquid inside spills and dump in the black bin and dispose the glass in the glass bin


Graphical representation of the conceptual model (CM0) and the narratives


To measure the voltage between the two cells the following set up can be used (as shown in the figure). There are two different variables that could influence the voltage measured in this chemical cell, which are temperature and concentration. In the experiment the concentration dependence of the voltage will be measured. It is expected that at a higher concentration of cupper ions, a higher voltage will be measured, since due to the higher concentration of ions more half reacions will occur, and therefore more electron transport. It is expected that the chemical cell will react as Cu2+ + Zn Zn2+ + Cu, this is found by taking a look at the cell different cell potentials.

Part of the experiment
Observation
Questions based on observation
1. Measuring the voltage between the cells.

1. Measure a certain voltage
1. Is there a relation between the voltage and the concentration (of ions).
2. Does the expected reaction occur

2. Is the voltage positive or negative 
2. Does the reaction Cu2+ + Zn Zn2+ + Cu occur?

From the point before (i.e., vi), the student should formulate the research questions (what the student wonder, what the student wishes to inquiry about). Please note: if the research question is connected to the table from point vi. Keep the same order and number.

Connection to table vi.
Research questions
1
What is the relation between the ion concentration and the measured cell potential?
2
In a chemical cell containing one cell with Zn and Zn2+ and the other cell with Cu and Cu2+, which reaction will occur?








After the practicum and during the meeting with the learning assistant.


Part of the experiment
Observation
Questions based on observation
Overarching question
1. Measurements
1. The lower the concentration of cupper ions, the lower the measured potential (in general).
1. Does the amount of cupper ions affect the measured cell potential?
1. When decreasing the concentration of reacting ions, does the cell potential decrease?
2. Measurements
2. The measured potentials have a clear decrease (when decreasing the concentration of ions), however some measured values differ a bit from what was expected.
2. Are the measured potentials correct or do they contain some significant errors?
2. Were the measurements done correctly?
3. Salt bridge
3. The salt bridge was leeking quite a lot and was not always fully filled.
3. Did the leaking of the salt bridge and the filling of the salt bridge influence the results?
3. Do the measured potentials contain any significant errors due to the salt bridge?
4. Electrodes 
4. The electrodes did touch the glas flasks (of the cell)
4. Did the contact of the electrodes with the glass influence the measured potentials?
4. Does the electrodes touches the glass of the flask influence the measured cell potential.








Conceptual model 1 (CM1): 

The chemical cell with the set-up shown in the figure has the half reactions Cu2+ + 2e- -> Cu (+0,34 V) and Zn2+ + 2e- -> Zn (-0,76 V)
which results in the total reaction Cu2+ + Zn Zn2+ + Cu. The reaction indicates that the Zn electrode provides 2 electrons that will be transported through the wire (and voltmeter) to a cupper ion, which than turns into Cu on the electrode. Since the cupper electrode receives the electrons (from the zinc electrode) it is the cathode and the Zn electrode will therefore be the anode. The measured cell potential is dependent on the concentration of cupper ions at a constant temperature. The more cupper ions, the higher the measured cell potential. This is likely due to the fact that the more cupper ions results in more ions that can participate in the half reactions (and therefore more half reaction will occur). For accurate measurements the measured value has to be taken as soon as possible, since the leaking of the salt bridge does decrease the concentration of ions, which will result in a slight error in the measured potential (if you wish to measure the potential for a certain concentration of ions).


Experimental results: 


Cell notation
Measured potential
Average potential
1
Zn / Zn2+ (0.10 M) / Cu2+ (0.1 M) reference electrode
1.04 V
1.019 V
2
Zn / Zn2+ (0.10 M) / Cu2+ (sat.) reference electrode
0.97 V
1.023 V
3
Zn / Zn2+ (0.10 M) / Cu2+ (1.0 * 10-3 M) / Cu
0.95 V
0.964 V
4
Zn / Zn2+ (0.10 M) / Cu2+ (0.030 M) / Cu
0.92 V
0.972 V
5
Zn / Zn2+ (0.10 M) / Cu2+ (0.30 M) / Cu
0.97 V
0.998 V
6
Zn / Zn2+ (0.10 M) / Cu2+ (unkown solution) / Cu
0.94 V
0.997 V
*The average potential is taken of the measurements of Jip, Chaksu and myself. 
*The chemical cell did exist of 25ml Zn2+ solution and 25 ml Cu2+ solutions at room temperature.

In the figure on the right the plotted average potential (V) against the concentration (M) can be seen. A slight increase in cell potential can be found increasing the concentration.



After the meeting with the learning assistant

CM0 (before the practicum).
CM1 (after the practicum and meeting with the learning assistant)
The relation of the measured cell potential to the concentration of reacting ions was unkown. 
By increasing the concentration of reaction ions, the measured cell potential increases.
What the reaction would be (what is the cathode or anode) was unkown.
It has been found that the Cu strip is the cathode and the Zn strip is the anode. Which results in the reaction Cu2+ + Zn Zn2+ + Cu


CM2
Short story and addition to CM1:

The cell potential dependence of the concentration can be found by using the Nernst equation: Ctotal = Ccell – (R*T)/(nF) * ln(Q), here C is the potential, R is the gas constant, T the temperature, n the amount of electrons in the half reaction, F is a constant and Q is the concentration of the reductors divided by the concentration of the oxidators ([reductor]/[oxidator]). When the concentration of the oxidator increases, the Q value will become smaller, which will result in a lower cell potential (Ctotal). Since the Q increases logarithmic, the relation of the potential with the concentration is also logratithmic, which can be seen in the graph. At a really low concentration there is eventually a minimum value, then Ctotal = Ccell.










1



