



Investigating the effect of cationic concentration on EMF 

Chakshu Vinod Turki- S2498618

Aim of the practicum and learning objective

Aim and learning objective from the practicum
Expected learning objective from the student before the experiment
Expected learning objective from the student after the experiment
Learning objective fulfilled?

The aim is to determine the electromotive force and understand the effect of cation and anion concentration on electromotive force. Learning objective is to understand how an electrochemical cell works.

Further understand how a conceptual model works, build knowledge. Learn to correlate electromotive force and cationic concentration. use this to solve unknown concentration of the electrochemical cell component.

To understand how an electrochemical cell works and the effect of cationic concentration on EMF.

Yes, by the end of this experiment I understood how an electrochemical cell works and the correlation between cationic concentration and EMF.
*The completion of this table is compulsory.

Short introduction

An electrochemical cell is a cell that can transport electrons from the anode to the cathode and therefore create a current and also store energy (as in a battery). An electrochemical cell contains multiple components: An anode + cathode, a salt bridge or membrane, a wire connecting the anode with the cathode and (often) two ionic solutions in which the anode and cathode are placed. The cathode undergoes a reduction reaction (Accepts electrons) and the anode undergoes an oxidation reaction (gives away electrons), the electrons that are given away and accepted on the other part are transported through the wire, creating a current. The electron transport happens without applying energy when the electron potential of the reaction is positive. 

The two half reactions in this case are:
- Cu2+ + 2e- -> Cu (+0,34 V)
- Zn2+ + 2e- -> Zn (-0,76 V)
Combining the half reactions give:
Cu2+ + Zn Zn2+ + Cu

Risk assessment of the chemicals used in the lab

The used chemicals in this experiment are as follows: Zinc-sulphate and Copper-sulphate solutions, A Copper and Zinc strip and a salt bridge.

Zinc sulphate
Hazards: Corrosive, Irritant, Environmentally damaging
What to do in case of:
Contact with eyes: rinse cautiously for several minutes
Contact with skin: rinse with water for several minutes
Spills: Wipe up with paper and dispose in black bin
Chemical waste category: 1
Wear gloves when handling this chemical
Copper sulphate
Hazards: Harmful, Irritant, Environmentally damaging
What to do in case of:
Contact with eyes: Rinse cautiously for several minutes
Contact with skin: Wash with plenty of water
Spills: Wipe up with paper and dispose in black bin
Chemical waste category: 1

Copper strip
Hazards: Its toxic, irritant and can cause organ toxicity if ingested
Spills: Pick up with tissue paper and dump in the black bin
In case of:
contact with skin: was the area with soap for 10-15 minutes
contact with eye: rinse the eyes with water gently for 10-15 minutes
after swallowing: rinse mouth thoroughly, do not induce vomiting. Seek medical attention
Waste category: It can be reused later for another experiment and do not need to be disposed.

Zinc strip
Hazards: May form combustible dust concentration in air, health hazards upon inhalation
Spills: Pick up with tissue paper and dump in the black bin
In case of:
contact with skin: was the area with soap for 10-15 minutes
contact with eye: rinse the eyes with water gently for 10-15 minutes
after swallowing: rinse mouth thoroughly, do not induce vomiting. Seek medical attention
Waste category: It can be reused later for another experiment and do not need to be disposed.

Salt bridge
Hazards: Health hazards are very limited
Spills: Clean with tissue paper if the salt bridge breaks and the liquid inside spills and dump in the black bin and dispose the glass in the glass bin and the remaining part maybe disposed of in another bin.
In case of:
contact with skin: was the area with soap for 10-15 minutes
contact with eye: rinse the eyes with water gently for 10-15 minutes
Note: Be careful of the syringe that will be used to fill the salt bridge because its sharp and can injure you.
Graphical representation of the conceptual model and the narratives


On the cathode, copper is present and it will go from solid to aqueous ions. The mobile electrons move from anode to cathode. Due to an increase in positive charge because of the Cu+2 ions. On the anode side, there will be an increase in negative charge because the Zn will become into Zn+2. Salt bridge is used to maintain electroneutrality.

In CM0 include the following table containing:
Part of the experiment
Observation
Questions based on observation
1. Before immersing the electrodes in the solutions
1. Voltage is 0 when the copper strip and zinc strip are aligned on top of each other.
1. What causes the potential difference to become 0 when the electrodes are brought in contact against each other?
2. After immersing the electrodes in the solutions.
2. Some of the copper from the copper strip was scraping off as concentration of copper sulfate was changed
2a.) Why was copper getting scraped from the copper strip as the concentration changed?
2b.) If the same copper strip is used over and over despite the surfaced being chipped off, will this influence the EMF produced?
3. While taking the measurement
3. Zinc Sulfate solution was becoming green over time
3a.) What makes the zinc sulfate solution turn green over time?
3b.) Does the solution turning green over time influence the EMF?

4. After taking measurements
4. Change in voltage based on cationic concentration
4. Will increasing the amount of cationic concentration increase the voltage?
5. After taking the measurements and taking the electrode out.
5. Zinc and Copper strips were becoming slightly black in their respective sulfate solutions.
5a.) Does something deposit on the copper/zinc strip?
5b.) Does having a higher concentration of the sulfate mean the surface of the strips become blacker?
*The completion of this table is compulsory.

From the point before (i.e., vi), the student should formulate the research questions (what the student wonder, what the student wishes to inquiry about). Please note: if the research question is connected to the table from point vi. Keep the same order and number.

Connection to table vi.
Research questions
1. Voltage is 0 when the copper strips and zinc strip are aligned on top of each other (observation 1)
1. How does aligning strips of 2 different metals effect the way in which measurements will be taken?
2. Changes seen at both the cathode and anode (observation 2, 3 & 5)
2. To what extent does change in cationic concentration effect the cathode and anode?
3. Change in voltage based on cationic concentration (Observation 4)
3. To what extent does cationic concentration effect the voltage produced?
*The completion of this table is compulsory.
Hypothesis:
My hypothesis is that, at higher cationic concentration the potential will be greater due to the availability of large number of ions to conduct. For this to occur, the concentration of copper sulfate must be increased. If the concentration of copper sulfate is lower then it will result in lower concentration of Cu2+ ions.

After the practicum and during the meeting with the learning assistant.

The meeting is designed as a reflection/explanation meeting. In this case, make use of tables from points vi and vii. You are allowed to ask the learning assistant about the table in point vi and the formulated research question in table point vii. At the end of the meeting, the student should discriminate between (i) bare observations and scientific observation and (ii) a question based on observation and a research question. Narrow down your thoughts and complete the table below.

Part of the experiment
Observation
Questions based on observation
Overarching question
1.Before immersing the electrodes in the solutions
1. Voltage is 0 when the copper strip and zinc strip are aligned on top of each other (bare)
1. Why does the voltage appear to be 0 when the 2 metal strips are aligned?
1. Does rubbing the electrodes against each other still should a reading of 0? 
2.After immersing the electrodes in the solutions
2. Some of the copper from the copper strip was scraping off as concentration of copper sulfate was changed (bare)
2. Why does the metal scrape off when concentration is increased?
2. Will the surface of the metal scraping off effect the voltage produced at different concentrations?
3. While take the measurement
3. Zinc sulfate solution was becoming green over time (bare)
3. What caused the zinc sulfate to eventually become green?
3. Is the green color due to the formation of copper chloride?
4. After taking measurements
4. Change in voltage based on cationic concentration (Scientific)
4. What causes the change in voltage when the cationic concentration is changed?
4.Will increasing the cationic concentration increase the voltage displayed?
5. After taking the measurements and taking the electrode out.
5. Zinc and Copper strips were becoming slightly black in their respective sulfate solutions (bare)
5. What is responsible for the darkening of the electrodes?
5. At a higher concentration, will the electrodes become darker in color?
*The completion of this table is compulsory.

Note that this is the transition between the first conceptual model CM0 and the new CM1. The new CM1, should include all the elements of a good conceptual model, as described in the handouts on conceptual modeling. Remember that CM1 is a more evolved version of CM0.

After the meeting with the learning assistant
Provide the final part-results and discussions (based on observations and the measurements). This is an intermediate version of the conceptual model, now called CM1. In this case, you should make a comparison between CM0 and CM1. Include a reflection in the form of bullet points for the transition between CM0 and CM1 using the table below:

CM0 (before the practicum). For CM0 indicate in red the points generated during the preparation meeting with the learning assistant.
CM1 (after the practicum and meeting with the learning assistant)
1. Properties of electrodes (observation 1 & 5)
1. To what extent does the properties of electrodes influence the voltage produced?
2. Relationship between cationic concentration & voltage (Observation 2, 3 & 4)
2. To what extent does the cationic concentration during an electrochemical process influence the voltage produced?
*The completion of this table is compulsory.

After completing the table, could you describe the rationale behind the changes between CM0 and CM1?
CM1: 

- Cu2+ + 2e- -> Cu (Cathode)
- Zn -> Zn2+ + 2e- (Anode)
On the cathode, copper is present and it will go from solid to aqueous ions which will result in mobile electrons moving from anode to cathode. The anode will oxidize and it will lose mass and the cathode will reduce and gain mass. Due to an increase in positive charge because of the Cu+2 ions, the salt bridge will be used to maintain electroneutrality by donating anions. On the anode side, there will be an increase in negative charge because the Zn will become into Zn+2 and to maintain charge balance, salt bridge will donate cations. 
*Note: The drawing of CM1 is same as CM0, the only difference in the way the story is structured.
Experimental data:
Chakshu
Cell Notation
Potential (V)
Zn ׀ Zn2+(0.10 M) ׀ Cu2+(0.1M) (reference electrode)
1.0455
Zn ׀ Zn2+(0.10 M) ׀ Cu2+(saturated) (reference electrode)
1.1138
Zn ׀ Zn2+(0.10 M) ׀ Cu2+(1×10-3M) ׀ Cu
0.9828
Zn ׀ Zn2+(0.10 M) ׀ Cu2+(0.030 M) ׀ Cu
1.0262
Zn ׀ Zn2+(0.10 M) ׀ Cu2+(0.30 M) ׀ Cu
1.0805
Zn ׀ Zn2+(0.10 M) ׀ Cu2+(Unknown Sol) ׀ Cu
1.0633
Jip
Cu2+ concentrations (M)
Measured potential (V)
0.1 M
0.9723 V
Saturated
0.9846 V
1*10^-3 M
0.9603 V
0.03 M
0.9701 V
0.3 M
0.9434* V
Unknown Solution
0.9885 V
*This was the first measurement, there were troubles with the salt bridge which probably led to this measurement being incorrect.
Julian

Cell notation
Potential
1
Zn / Zn2+ (0.10 M) / Cu2+ (0.1 M) reference electrode
1.04 V
2
Zn / Zn2+ (0.10 M) / Cu2+ (sat.) reference electrode
0.97 V
3
Zn / Zn2+ (0.10 M) / Cu2+ (1.0 * 10-3 M) / Cu
0.95 V
4
Zn / Zn2+ (0.10 M) / Cu2+ (0.030 M) / Cu
0.92 V
5
Zn / Zn2+ (0.10 M) / Cu2+ (0.30 M) / Cu
0.97 V
6
Zn / Zn2+ (0.10 M) / Cu2+ (unkown solution) / Cu
0.94 V

The saturated one has the highest potential(voltage) because it has the highest potential
The unknown solutions concentration can be predicted to be between 0.1M and 0.3M because the potential(voltage) displayed falls in the range of the potential(voltage) displayed between 0.1M and 0.3M
The values of potential(voltage) seem to increase with cationic concentration

A new CM called CM2
This is the final conceptual model derived from CM1. This is part of the final reflection on the making of the model (that is, reflection in the form of bullet points for the transition between CM1 and CM2). Describe the CM2 as a narrative or a short story, make use of calculation, equations, or if you dare make use of a graph from your experimental data.

The final model CM2 is similar to CM1 however, there is some extra information that much be added. This experiment mainly had 2 parameters to focus on which is concentration and temperature. These parameters are important when considering the Nernst equation. The Nernst equation is as follow:
Utotal= Ucell - RT/nF(Ln [Red]/[Ox])
As the copper side is reduced, it has a higher concentration value which causes the logarithmic value to become smaller thus the Utotal value goes up.


Graph 1 Graph on potential vs concentration of copper sulfate
As seen in graph 1, we can observe the logarithmic behaviour over time as the concentration of copper sulfate is increased. This could help us predict the concentration of the unknown and saturated sample. The fact that r^2 value is close to 1 also tells us that there is some amount of accuracy in the data that is displayed. 


